In Kubernetes, swap is usually disabled because Kubernetes expects predictable memory behavior from the operating system. If swap is enabled, the Linux kernel may move application memory from RAM to disk, which can create performance and stability issues for containers and cluster components.

Main reasons to disable swap
1. Predictable pod performance

Kubernetes schedules workloads based on available CPU and RAM.
If swap is enabled:

A pod may appear to have enough memory
But some memory pages may actually be swapped to disk
Accessing swapped memory is much slower than RAM

This causes:

Slow applications
Random latency spikes
Unpredictable pod behavior
2. Kubernetes memory limits become unreliable

Kubernetes uses:

requests → guaranteed resources
limits → maximum allowed memory

With swap enabled:

A container may exceed physical RAM usage
The kernel may swap instead of triggering OOM (Out Of Memory)

This breaks Kubernetes resource management logic.

3. Prevent node instability

When Linux starts heavy swapping:

Disk I/O increases drastically
System becomes sluggish
kubelet, container runtime, or etcd may hang

In severe cases:

Node becomes NotReady
Pods get evicted
Cluster instability occurs

This condition is often called swap thrashing.

4. Kubelet requirement

By default, the Kubernetes kubelet refuses to start if swap is enabled.

You may see errors like:

Running with swap on is not supported

That is why most Kubernetes installation guides include:

swapoff -a

and removal/commenting of swap entries from:

/etc/fstab
Example

Suppose:

Node RAM = 16GB
Pods consume 15GB
System starts swapping 4GB to disk

Now:

Applications slow down badly
Read/write latency increases
Health probes may fail
Kubernetes may restart healthy pods thinking they are unhealthy
Modern Kubernetes support for swap

Newer versions of Kubernetes have limited swap support using:

--fail-swap-on=false

and configurable swap behavior.

But for production clusters, best practice is still:

Disable swap
Use proper memory requests/limits
Use node sizing correctly
How to check swap
swapon --show
free -h
Disable swap temporarily
swapoff -a
Disable permanently

Edit /etc/fstab and comment the swap line:

# /swap.img none swap sw 0 0

Then reboot or run:

swapoff -a
